GNU Hello configure experiment (2026-10-04)

The baseline and follow-ups below describe the earlier wrappers. See the
porting follow-up at the end for the current working package.

Baseline, with no Hello overrides:
  nix build .#legacyPackages.x86_64-linux.pkgsXbox.hello --keep-failed -L

Hello 2.12.3 accepts --build=x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu and
--host=x86_64-pc-windows-msvc, selects the target-prefixed Clang, and stops at
"C compiler cannot create executables". config.log shows posix_spawn failure.
Clang's verbose invocation shows it trying to run link.exe. The wrapper puts
-fuse-ld=lld in cc-ldflags, which Nix forwards as a linker argument rather than
a compiler-driver option. The target binutils also lacks the lld-link executable
the MSVC driver searches for.

Bounded follow-up, leaving Hello's source and configure unmodified:
  nix build --impure --file nix/experiments/hello-configure.nix --keep-failed -L

This adds native LLD to PATH and passes -fuse-ld=lld through CFLAGS. Configure
then links a.exe successfully, discovers .exe and .o suffixes, recognizes cross
compilation, and executes many header/function probes. It eventually stops at:
  cannot make x86_64-pc-windows-msvc-clang report undeclared builtins

The failing negative test is "int main(void) { (void) strchr; return 0; }".
Both its ordinary and -fno-builtin variants compile, because the compiler wrapper
force-includes msvc-compat.h, which includes windows.h and indirectly declares
strchr. The same source fails with an undeclared identifier when compiled by
bare Clang targeting MSVC without that forced header. This is probe contamination,
not inability to diagnose undeclared identifiers.

Other observations before the fatal probe:
  - Autoconf reports GNU C = no because this target does not define __GNUC__.
  - Its C89/C99/C11 conformance probes reject the missing __STDC__ macro.
  - Missing Unix headers and functions produce normal negative probe results.
  - Runtime probes use cross-compilation guesses; no Xbox code was executed.
  - LLD still warns about the original misplaced -fuse-ld=lld argument.

The normal pkgsXbox compiler and working Xbox app were unchanged by this test.
Next toolchain work would move linker selection into driver flags, expose
lld-link, and scope the C++/WinRT compatibility header more narrowly. After that,
MSVC conformance detection and GNU/Unix library assumptions may need adaptation.
This experiment does not establish that GNU Hello can compile or run on Xbox.

Captured local evidence (ignored build-output/):
  hello-original-config.log   Baseline config.log
  conftest-original.log       Verbose baseline link invocation
  hello-linker-probe3.log     Follow-up build transcript
  hello-linker3-config.log    Follow-up config.log
  undeclared-probe.log        Isolated negative test without forced headers

Second follow-up: remove the forced compatibility header from pkgsXbox's
compiler, retaining it only in uwp-crossbuild's app build driver.

The same hello-configure.nix linker experiment now completes configure,
including "undeclared functions... none needed", and creates Makefile and
config.h. No configure cache answers were overridden. Compilation then fails
in the bundled GNU portability code:
  - getprogname.c: "getprogname module not ported to this OS"
  - getopt.c: getenv is undeclared under the UWP API family
  - fcntl.c: HANDLE_FLAG_INHERIT is unavailable under the UWP API family

This confirms that forced headers contaminated configure tests. The remaining
errors expose OS/API portability work, rather than a configure execution problem.
The linker selection still uses the local experiment's overrides.
Captured transcript: build-output/hello-no-compat.log.

Porting follow-up: normal pkgsXbox.hello now builds successfully.

The compiler selects LLD in its driver flags and exposes lld-link. The misplaced
linker argument is removed. nix/hello-uwp.patch supplies the three source fixes
above and replaces the stat implementation's desktop-only CreateFileA call
with CreateFile2, retaining ANSI code-page conversion, sharing modes, directory
handling, and GetLastError across temporary buffer cleanup.

The source/configure is otherwise unchanged, and no configure cache answers are
overridden. Target tests/install checks are disabled in the Linux builder;
check-hello.py checks executable behavior through Wine. hello-configure.nix now
simply returns the ported package, with no experimental linker overrides.

The result is a Windows console program, not yet a packaged Xbox UWP app.
Inspection finds desktop CRT startup imports, and it does not have the UWP
activation entry points/flags. A successful Wine run does not verify Xbox
activation. The existing zlib-linked UWP app uses its separate proven build path.

Captured build: build-output/hello-ported.log.
Behavioral checks: build-output/hello-behavior.log.
PE imports: build-output/hello-imports.log.
