SBCL through pkgsXbox: cross-build experiments (2026-10-05)

Pinned Nixpkgs recipe/source: SBCL 2.6.8. Linux build host, nixbox's existing
x86_64-pc-windows-msvc Clang 23 / static Microsoft CRT cross stdenv.

Baseline, no overrides:
  nix build .#legacyPackages.x86_64-linux.pkgsXbox.sbcl --keep-failed

Evaluation rejects SBCL because the recipe's meta.platforms excludes Windows.
With NIXPKGS_ALLOW_UNSUPPORTED_SYSTEM=1 and --impure, evaluation reaches the
bootstrap Lisp dependency and then rejects an unfree win-sdk. Permitting unfree
packages for that invocation reaches a separate Visual Studio license-acceptance
gate. No license setting was changed and no extra SDK was built. The existing
Xbox SDK/toolchain was not the failing dependency: the recipe's default ECL
bootstrap reference was selecting target-side packages.

Bounded follow-up: use native Linux SBCL for bootstrapLisp and native coreutils
for the recipe's substituted command paths; override only this derivation's
platform metadata. This gets past the bootstrap/evaluation gates, but default
coreCompression pulls in target zstd, whose target grep/PCRE2 dependencies fail
before SBCL itself builds. PCRE2's pcre2grep.c reports 14 compilation errors.
This is not evidence of an SBCL runtime/compiler failure.

Second follow-up: disable optional core compression so the build reaches SBCL:
  nix build --impure --file nix/experiments/sbcl-cross.nix --keep-failed -L

Before the Win32 changes below, the recipe unpacked/patched the pinned source,
accepted the native bootstrap SBCL, then entered make-config.sh. It chose
sbcl_arch="x86-64" and detected the OS using the build host's uname. The generated
local-target-features.lisp-expr contained :unix :linux :elf :gcc-tls :use-sys-mmap
:largefile, despite the Windows-targeting x86_64-pc-windows-msvc-clang compiler.

The decisive configuration-helper command and failure are:
  x86_64-pc-windows-msvc-clang -I../src/runtime -Wunused-parameter \
    -fno-omit-frame-pointer -momit-leaf-frame-pointer \
    determine-endianness.c -ldl -o determine-endianness
  lld-link: error: could not open 'dl.lib': No such file or directory

This is not a request to add libdl to the Xbox SDK. SBCL has selected its Linux
configuration. No SBCL runtime or Lisp core was produced, and nothing from this
build was run on Xbox. The earlier platform probe remains independent evidence
that generated code, page faults, unwind registration and thread/TLS primitives
can work on the console.

Source inspection explains the next boundary:
  - make-config.sh derives sbcl_os from uname and does not consume Nix's host
    triple. --xc-host chooses the bootstrap Lisp, not the target operating system.
  - tools-for-build helpers are compiled with the selected compiler, then run
    directly by the scripts. Merely forcing win32 will not provide a Linux
    execution path for PE helpers or the target runtime used during warm init.
  - src/runtime/Config.x86-64-win32 selects GCC and GNU PE linker flags/definition
    files; it is not an existing MSVC-targeted Clang configuration.
  - make.sh documents separate host and target stages; its one-machine sequence
    is not a turnkey Nixpkgs Linux-to-Windows cross build.

Win32 follow-up (current reproducer)
-----------------------------------

sbcl-cross.nix now explicitly selects WindowsNT in make-config.sh, uses the Xbox
C compiler in Config.x86-64-win32, and runs configuration/feature PE helpers
under native Wine 11.0 with a private build-local prefix. The perfecthash
generator is instead compiled with the native Linux C compiler: the bootstrap
Lisp invokes it on the host. Optional mark-region GC and linkable-runtime mode
are disabled so the experiment starts with Windows GENCGC and runtime objects.

Configuration and make-host-1.sh complete:
  //building cross-compiler, and doing first genesis
  beginning GENESIS, creating headers in "src/runtime/genesis"
  //entering make-target-1.sh

The generated features include :win32 :sb-thread :sb-safepoint :little-endian
:ucrt :gencgc, not :linux or :elf. No target feature/grovel answer is fabricated.
The configuration helpers run under Wine, not on Xbox; their success and CPU
feature selection are not device validation. :sb-futex was not selected by the
feature probes and is not forced on.

The first runtime compile exposed MinGW headers absent from Microsoft's CRT:
unistd.h, sys/time.h, sys/file.h, sys/param.h, and a duplicate timespec definition.
sbcl-msvc-headers.patch guards Unix-only includes, uses io.h on Windows, retains
UCRT's timespec, defines MSVC's missing ssize_t, uses MAX_PATH in the Windows
dirname buffer, and includes process.h/intrin.h where their APIs are used.
process.h stays local to its consumers: including it in every runtime unit also
imports UCRT's legacy 'complex' macro, colliding with generated Lisp structures.

With those fixes, 35 runtime object files compile as amd64 COFF, including
thread.o, x86-64-arch.o, x86-64-assem.o and gencgc.o. make uses -k to collect
independent errors; it still exits unsuccessfully. The current blockers are:

  - wrap.c includes dirent.h and wraps opendir/readdir/closedir. These are MinGW
    compatibility facilities, not UCRT headers/functions. Dropping the header
    or supplying an empty one would not implement these wrappers.
  - getpid and strcasecmp are undeclared. UCRT gates getpid behind its desktop
    family; Windows GetCurrentProcessId and UCRT _stricmp are candidate real
    replacements, not reasons to suppress implicit-declaration errors.
  - getenv is hidden by UCRT's desktop-family guard despite stdlib.h being
    included. SBCL uses it for runtime options and diagnostics. This needs an
    intentional app-container environment/configuration policy.
  - runtime.c's CommandLineToArgvW and win32-os.c's SetThreadStackGuarantee,
    AddVectoredExceptionHandler, SHGetFolderPathA and CryptGenRandom are not
    declared under the existing UWP headers. The earlier Xbox probe verified
    deliberate desktop VEH imports, not all these desktop services.
  - SBCL accesses CONTEXT.FloatSave; the Microsoft x64 SDK names the corresponding
    field FltSave. Register/FP-context adaptation needs to preserve its ABI.

The native thread API and CPUID declaration errors disappeared after adding
their actual headers. No shared compiler settings, SDK-family restrictions or
global package-platform metadata were relaxed.

Reproduce from the repository root (new patch files must be git-added):
  source bin/nix-cache-options
  nix build "${nix_options[@]}" --impure --file nix/experiments/sbcl-cross.nix \
    --keep-failed --out-link build-output/sbcl-cross -L

The final attempted derivation was:
  /nix/store/1nfnbs0vnz4ywlrjks0wwkvn96d2aayj-sbcl-x86_64-pc-windows-msvc-2.6.8.drv
It fails in make-target-1.sh's runtime compilation, before linking, target header
groveling, make-host-2.sh or target cold/warm initialization. The groveler's Wine
execution path is wired but not yet exercised. The remaining target stages and
installation also need adaptation; this is not a finished package recipe.
No SBCL executable or target Lisp core was produced, and no SBCL build was
deployed to Xbox. The experiment remains outside successful flake packages/checks.

Next useful step: a localized MSVC/UWP runtime adaptation for these concrete
boundaries, followed by translating the GNU PE export/linker configuration and
running the target initialization under Wine. Only a real runtime/core wrapped
in an Xbox app can establish SBCL-on-console success. Do not fake grovel results,
silently compile the Linux backend, or globally mark pkgsXbox.sbcl supported.
